[Guest 2]: Welcome to the IBM Podcast Network.
[Amit Varma]: Ram Singh is a farmer in a small village in India. One morning he woke up to a loud noise coming from over his head.
[Amit Varma]: He got out of bed and looked out of the window. There he saw that there was a giant spaceship hovering over his hut
[Amit Varma]: with the logo of the Indian government on it. It was lowering a giant steel cage that would fit neatly around his hut.
[Amit Varma]: Alarmed, Ram Singh rushed out looking for someone to speak to and spotted a babu in a safari suit.
[Amit Varma]: What's going on, he asked the babu. What are you doing?
[Amit Varma]: The babu said, we are lowering this cage outside your hut so that you are trapped inside.
[Amit Varma]: You can't go out and no one else can get inside. Why are you doing that, asked poor Ram Singh.
[Amit Varma]: The man in a safari suit just laughed at him. He said, you fool, we have been doing it for almost 70 years now.
[Amit Varma]: This is the story of agriculture in India.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, my weekly podcast on the seen and unseen effects of public policy.
[Amit Varma]: This week, I want to talk about some of the laws around agriculture in India, specifically two laws.
[Amit Varma]: One, which restricts entry into agriculture by preventing the entry of big corporations into farming.
[Amit Varma]: And two, which stops farmers from taking an escape route from farming
[Amit Varma]: by not allowing agricultural land to be sold for non-agricultural purposes.
[Amit Varma]: What is the seen effect of these laws?
[Amit Varma]: The seen effect of such restrictions on agriculture is that farmers are protected from greedy, rapacious capitalists
[Amit Varma]: and an important sector of our economy, agriculture, is safeguarded.
[Amit Varma]: All this sounds most noble, but is it possible that these regulations are actually hurting both the farmers themselves and our nation?
[Amit Varma]: To discuss the unseen effects of these regulations, I have two guests on the show with me.
[Amit Varma]: Pawan Srinath is a fellow at the Takshashila Institution and Karthik Shashidhar is a renowned quant with a cult following,
[Amit Varma]: a management consultant, a columnist at Mint and adjunct faculty at IIM Bangalore.
[Amit Varma]: Guys, welcome to the show.
[Amit Varma]: Pawan, give me some background on how we have regulated farming in India over the last 70 years.
[Guest 2]: So, ever since independence, we've had this idea that farmers are the backbone of the country,
[Guest 2]: they are poor, they need to be taken care of and they are suffering because of various reasons.
[Guest 2]: So, in order to do this, there have been heavy restrictions placed on who can do farming.
[Guest 2]: So, the fear is, you know, you can have a company which comes and takes land away from people,
[Guest 2]: you can have one of us who lives in a city who has more access to resources,
[Guest 2]: who goes in and cheats the poor farmer out of their wealth, right, because land is perhaps all that a few people own.
[Guest 2]: So, that's the intention of why only farmers and collectives of farmers are allowed to own land and practice farming.
[Guest 2]: And even unless you have, I think, different states have different rules,
[Guest 2]: but unless you have an ancestor or a parent or a grandparent who has done farming or still owns farmland,
[Guest 2]: can you get back into this?
[Amit Varma]: I must remind you here that Amitabh Bachchan is a farmer, so more of us are farmers than we know.
[Amit Varma]: Karthik, so what are the unseen effects of this?
[Amit Varma]: What is the problem with protecting the farmer in this manner?
[Guest 1]: See, the thing is, there are two roles that a farmer has to play here.
[Guest 1]: The problem with this regulation is that it forces a farmer to be an entrepreneur.
[Guest 1]: And there is a seen effect there.
[Guest 1]: There's a noble thing that like it comes from on the back of the zamindari system where they said like,
[Guest 1]: Oh, you don't want the farmer to be a slave.
[Guest 1]: You don't want him to like be farming for someone else.
[Guest 1]: You need to own your land and farm for yourself and things.
[Guest 1]: So, you're forcing everyone to be entrepreneurs.
[Guest 1]: Now, being a farmer and being a businessman are two completely unrelated skills.
[Guest 1]: And what is happening now is that the farmer whose primary skill is farming is also being forced to be a businessman.
[Guest 1]: And there are a large number of risks associated with farming.
[Guest 1]: And not only does the farmer have to take care of his crop and apply his crop science to the farm,
[Guest 1]: he also needs to be tracking the markets, hedging against the risks and so on.
[Guest 1]: So, we are overburdening the farmer by forcing him to be an entrepreneur.
[Guest 2]: Just to add on that, so there's the risk of weather.
[Guest 2]: And in a country where we can't even predict the monsoon really well right now, there's price risks as you mentioned.
[Guest 2]: There can be all kinds of shortages, infrastructure problems.
[Guest 2]: I mean, we are making them forced entrepreneurs and then sort of celebrating that as a virtue.
[Guest 2]: Imagine if every single software engineer in the country was not allowed to form a company,
[Guest 2]: not allowed to form a group, but just work entirely on their own.
[Guest 2]: Even over there, sure, you have technology to at least network people and you can't even network farmers.
[Guest 2]: But that's the big challenge, right?
[Guest 2]: I mean, what software would India be producing?
[Guest 2]: What technology would we be making if no one was allowed to form a company?
[Guest 1]: And then there's a cash flow problem.
[Guest 1]: So, right now, the way farming works is, okay, you own your land.
[Guest 1]: Beginning of the season, you have to invest to buy seeds, buy equipment, buy fertilizer.
[Guest 1]: And then you farm and then in order to get paid, you just have to pray and hope that you have a good crop and it fetches a good price.
[Guest 1]: So, continuing Pawan's analogy, imagine that software engineers in India were not allowed to take a salary.
[Guest 1]: And they could only get paid in terms of dividends or profits from what they would make at the end of the year, right?
[Guest 1]: So, farming is like that.
[Amit Varma]: So, to continue on that analogy, what would happen, I imagine, is after a period of a year,
[Amit Varma]: a lot of software engineers would be out of jobs, would be broke and they'd move on to other professions.
[Amit Varma]: Is that what is happening in farming and is it possible for farmers to actually escape farming?
[Guest 1]: Actually, if that happens, I don't think it's a bad thing.
[Guest 1]: Because right now, you have like some 40 or 50% of the country producing 15% of the GDP.
[Guest 1]: So, if you were to have 20% producing 15%, those 20% would be making a lot more than what the farmers are making now.
[Guest 1]: So, it's not a bad thing.
[Guest 1]: But again, you have restrictions in other markets.
[Guest 1]: Because of the restriction in land that Pawan mentioned that you can't buy land unless you're a farmer,
[Guest 1]: the market for farmland is not particularly liquid.
[Guest 1]: And it's hard for the farmer to kind of sell and like get away from his capital and so on, right?
[Guest 2]: So, the value of that land will accrue to the person who has the ability to change the use of that land,
[Guest 2]: which is typically some guy sitting in a government office somewhere, rather than the owner of the land, right?
[Guest 2]: So, he's not even in full possession of the wealth.
[Amit Varma]: So, a farmer who's in debt and commits suicide might actually be sitting on debt capital,
[Amit Varma]: to use Anand Dasota's words, which he can't actually make use of.
[Guest 2]: Absolutely.
[Guest 2]: But to go back to this, every single country which has increased in prosperity,
[Guest 2]: which has increased incomes, has had a large exodus of people out of farming and into typically industry,
[Guest 2]: but out of farming into more productive things, right?
[Guest 2]: And in this process, there's more skilling that is happening, there is security that is given.
[Guest 2]: In fact, the start of, you know, modern ideas of social security comes from sort of Bismarck's Germany, right?
[Guest 2]: Where you have sort of industries going up and then sort of a conversation on, okay, some sort of support should be provided.
[Guest 2]: So, all those things that we think of as now as a part of this table, evolved from that idea of,
[Guest 2]: first you have a company, they give you security by giving you a salaried income,
[Guest 2]: and they give you benefits, you get regularity, you have predictability,
[Guest 2]: and predictability is one of the most wonderful things in our lives, right?
[Guest 2]: I mean, those of us who have a lot of it can take it for granted and want adventure and spontaneity,
[Guest 2]: but I wouldn't inflict that on…
[Amit Varma]: And no farmer has that, and it's, you know, some of us take unpredictability and entrepreneurship by choice.
[Amit Varma]: We like to take those risks, but farmers don't have a choice in the matter.
[Guest 1]: And coming back to an earlier point, right?
[Guest 1]: Like, apart from not having a choice in the matter, what it also does is like,
[Guest 1]: a farmer is forced to do things he's unsuited to do.
[Guest 1]: Things like, how do I sell it to, who do I sell it to, do I sell it in the local market,
[Guest 1]: or do I take it to Bombay, or do I like kind of just sell it to the guy next door?
[Guest 1]: And there's so many decisions, and what crop should I plant this year?
[Guest 1]: These are all things that are like hardcore business decisions.
[Guest 1]: They need to be done by hardcore business people.
[Guest 1]: And you're forcing the poor farmer to do all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Now, the counter view to that is that if you just allow others into farming,
[Amit Varma]: if you allow, say, big companies like Reliance and Atata to get into farming,
[Amit Varma]: they buy out all the poor farmers and, you know, then the farmers don't have their land anymore and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And you have these big conglomerates controlling farming.
[Guest 2]: So, I don't know if they necessarily need to buy out the farmers, right?
[Guest 2]: So, you can have interesting architectures around that.
[Guest 2]: You can have farmers as, I don't know, shareholders in a company that is formed locally.
[Guest 2]: You can have farmers who are given sort of guarantees of various sorts.
[Guest 2]: And the idea is, yes, all of that is hard.
[Guest 2]: Yes, sort of enforcement of contracts is hard.
[Guest 2]: But we have so many people who are happily taking salaries and not complaining,
[Guest 2]: and they're not necessarily getting cheated out.
[Guest 2]: So, this idea that somehow a corporation can come and take over everything,
[Guest 2]: just because bargaining rights are different, is wrong.
[Guest 2]: And the other, the unseen effect of all of this, right,
[Guest 2]: is people repeatedly ask for the benevolent hand of the government,
[Guest 2]: which is never terribly benevolent, right?
[Guest 2]: So, you want intervention and price, because price is uncertain.
[Guest 2]: You want intervention for crop failure because of weather, because that is uncertain.
[Guest 2]: So, every single problem, and we've listed all these problems,
[Guest 2]: the automatic solution everyone's asking for is government intervene, right?
[Guest 2]: So, one intervention begets many, many other interventions.
[Amit Varma]: So, since this logic seems so infallible to me, that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you give the farmer some security, don't force him to be an entrepreneur and so on,
[Amit Varma]: what are the obstacles to the policy change that you recommend?
[Amit Varma]: Who are the interest groups who want farmers to remain impoverished
[Guest 1]: and in the condition that they are?
[Guest 1]: See, the main interest group there is the government.
[Guest 1]: As Pawan mentioned, like, because the farmers have an uncertain future,
[Guest 1]: lots of risks, and they keep asking for the benevolent hand of the government.
[Guest 1]: If the farmer's lot becomes better, if he gets paid a regular salary,
[Guest 1]: and if he doesn't have to face all these risks that he faces now,
[Guest 1]: and maybe he has an employer, he'll stop asking the government for its benevolence.
[Guest 1]: And when you stop asking the government for benevolence,
[Guest 1]: you're taking power away from the government.
[Guest 1]: So, it's not in the interest of the government to actually reform this law
[Guest 1]: and reduce the need for their own benevolence.
[Guest 2]: So, in a sense, what we've done, I think, is to get rid of the ills of the zamindari system.
[Guest 2]: We sort of nationalized the zamindari system, right?
[Guest 2]: So, you have a national government, which is the Uber zamindar.
[Guest 2]: And that's what they're doing.
[Guest 2]: They're extending patronage, right, in the form of benevolence.
[Guest 2]: And so, you kill a patronage network, their power goes away.
[Amit Varma]: So, educate me on this. What percentage of the Indian population depends on agriculture?
[Amit Varma]: And what are the comparable percentages in advanced Western countries?
[Guest 2]: Okay. So, here's the number that keeps floating around, right?
[Guest 2]: 60% of India depends on farming.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: Two fallacies over there.
[Guest 2]: That 60% number is a bit old. The number is actually reducing.
[Guest 2]: Second is even people who are token dependent on farming
[Guest 2]: are actually getting most of their income from non-farm sources, right?
[Guest 2]: So, they're doing small service jobs, they're sort of participating in the rural economy in various ways.
[Guest 2]: And the other thing which is sort of hidden is you go to rural India,
[Guest 2]: you don't find as many young people anymore.
[Guest 2]: People between the ages of 20 and, say, 35.
[Guest 2]: Because they're off in the city trying to work.
[Guest 2]: So, sons of farmers, daughters of farmers are not doing farming.
[Guest 2]: So, if you actually do an age profile, that 60% comes, first of all, starts with something like 50,
[Guest 2]: and then that drops down to about 20% or lower.
[Guest 2]: And that depends, of course, state by state.
[Guest 2]: What are the implications of that?
[Guest 2]: The implications of that is you need new sources of jobs.
[Guest 2]: And India has been bad at providing that.
[Guest 2]: The informal sector in the country absorbs a lot.
[Guest 2]: So, we don't have a traditional sort of a labor strike or a labor movement that way.
[Guest 2]: I mean, we don't have the kind of insane unemployment rates that other countries do,
[Guest 2]: but there's a desperate need for more jobs.
[Amit Varma]: And with specific, in the context of the demographics you mentioned,
[Amit Varma]: that if you have older generations of farmers who continue farming,
[Amit Varma]: but the kids go away to the towns and the cities to work in industries, etc.
[Amit Varma]: What happens to farming then?
[Guest 2]: So, you have a massive adverse selection, right?
[Guest 2]: So, you have people who are desperate and are unable to do anything else for a variety of reasons,
[Guest 2]: who are sort of stuck in farming.
[Guest 2]: And anyone who can do something better exits.
[Guest 1]: Actually, we can see what's happening there in commercial agriculture,
[Guest 1]: where for-profit farming is allowed.
[Guest 1]: It's in so-called cash crops like coffee and so on.
[Guest 1]: So, the big story about how some coffee companies have grown
[Guest 1]: is that you have all these coffee farmers whose sons and daughters don't want to be coffee farmers.
[Guest 1]: And then they just get acquired.
[Guest 1]: And the easiest people for them to sell their land to is this big coffee plantation company.
[Guest 1]: And those guys employ their workers and so on.
[Guest 1]: And they've been managing it.
[Guest 1]: And I think it's been doing rather well.
[Guest 1]: So, I think the plantation sector, which I think is still open for commercial investment,
[Guest 1]: shows the way to what agriculture…
[Amit Varma]: And you don't have this kind of distress,
[Amit Varma]: you don't have coffee plantation workers committing suicide and so on.
[Guest 1]: They're workers, right?
[Guest 1]: They might be committing suicide because their employer might not be treating them well.
[Guest 1]: They're not committing suicide because the coffee crop failed because their workers are working on a salary and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly. So, they have that security as all of us do in whatever jobs that we have.
[Guest 2]: Of course, there are problems.
[Guest 2]: I mean, there are problems in the software sector as well.
[Guest 2]: But I think it's unarguable that their lot is better than the lot of a rice farmer in any state in the country.
[Amit Varma]: So, I interrupted you a little while back.
[Amit Varma]: So, you were saying that the 60% figure is false and is probably on a spectrum between 60 and 20 somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: What is it in like, say, Germany, USA?
[Guest 2]: Single digit percentages.
[Guest 2]: 3%, 4%.
[Guest 2]: So, there's this idea that we need so many farmers for food security.
[Guest 2]: The food security thing still remains as a narrative.
[Guest 2]: No, you need a much smaller number of people to do the farming.
[Guest 2]: You need more people in other sectors.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: So, I mean, countries are managing with much smaller numbers.
[Guest 2]: China has done a brilliant job of moving a humongous number of people out of farming.
[Guest 2]: I think now China might have dropped to single digits or in the early double digits.
[Guest 2]: So, if India gets its act together, and I don't want to mix cause and effect over here.
[Guest 2]: It's cyclical.
[Guest 2]: Sure.
[Guest 2]: But if we get our act together, we grow, we provide new jobs in industry and so on.
[Guest 2]: In 20-30 years, we should be able to achieve what China did.
[Guest 2]: So, it's not unthinkable and we are already sort of automatically doing it in spite of,
[Guest 2]: you know, bad laws.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So, finally, I'll ask each of you, what would your reform suggestion be in this context?
[Guest 1]: I think one important reform would be in terms of liberalizing the market for agricultural
[Guest 1]: land.
[Guest 1]: Even if we were to not reform this whole thing of, I mean, Pawan mentioned about not changing
[Guest 1]: land use and stuff, but if everybody is allowed to invest in agricultural land, the market
[Guest 1]: for agricultural land will automatically become far more liquid.
[Guest 1]: And that will enable any farmer who wants to exit the system and who currently is not
[Guest 1]: able to do so, to exit in a more graceful manner.
[Guest 1]: And that will possibly make things far more efficient.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, that I completely agree.
[Guest 2]: The single biggest thing is liberalize the land market.
[Guest 2]: Allow more people to buy and sell, allow different modes of, it need not be a sale per se, it
[Guest 2]: could be, you know, some form of a land bank that's formed such that even if value accrues
[Guest 2]: over time, dividends from that accrual can go to people who originally owned it.
[Guest 2]: So, a lot of things can be done.
[Guest 2]: But yeah, that's not just an agriculture problem, but a pan-India problem, liberalizing the
[Guest 2]: land markets.
[Guest 2]: But I think that's the single biggest thing.
[Amit Varma]: So, here's what I don't understand.
[Amit Varma]: Liberalizing the land market is something that would actually be in the interest of
[Amit Varma]: big business.
[Amit Varma]: Now, for the last few, maybe decade and a half, government has essentially been run
[Amit Varma]: by interest groups and you could say run by big business.
[Guest 1]: So, what is really the obstacle here, I mean?
[Guest 1]: Okay.
[Guest 1]: So, I think liberalization is in favor of all big businesses.
[Guest 1]: When you have, but when you have interest, but it's not in, what is in favor of all businesses
[Guest 1]: is not in favor of interest groups.
[Amit Varma]: Specific interest, yeah.
[Guest 1]: So, what's happening now is that because of you had the Land Acquisition Act and now there
[Guest 1]: are amendments to that and so on.
[Guest 1]: It's in favor of the special interest groups and not in favor of all big businesses.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: And so it's like kind of what we tend to see, the scene is that special interest group equal
[Guest 1]: to big businesses.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: But the unseen is that special interest group is a subset of big business and it depends
[Guest 1]: on the government in power and so on.
[Guest 1]: Right.
[Guest 1]: So, we have to take out the ability of the government to intervene on behalf of the special
[Guest 1]: interest groups.
[Guest 1]: It is not in the interest of either the government or the special interest group, but it's in
[Guest 1]: the interest of big business.
[Guest 1]: So, we need to separate out this thing between big business and the groups.
[Guest 2]: I want to pull out an analogy that my colleague Nitin Bhai uses and that's about how, because
[Guest 2]: regulations are so dense, because it's so hard to do business and so hard to operate
[Guest 2]: in the land markets.
[Guest 2]: Most players who are successful are successful because they have created knee sized loopholes.
[Guest 2]: Right.
[Guest 2]: So, they managed to get themselves into this entire thing.
[Guest 2]: So, and they're now protected from competition.
[Guest 2]: So, you have big real estate houses, big businesses who know how to play this game and they've,
[Guest 2]: you know, set their entire thing together.
[Guest 2]: So, now if you liberalize it, they lose their incumbent advantage.
[Guest 2]: They have to face stiff competition.
[Guest 2]: Nobody wants to do that.
[Amit Varma]: Awesome.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for your insights, Karthik and Pawan.
[Amit Varma]: Pleasure having you on the show.
[Amit Varma]: My pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: The laws in India around agriculture are actually a perfect example of how good intentions often
[Amit Varma]: lead to bad outcomes.
[Amit Varma]: And these are outcomes that could have been predicted by any competent economist given
[Amit Varma]: the kind of incentives created by these laws.
[Unknown]: Just because an effect is unseen does not mean that it is unforeseeable.
[Unknown]: On that note, I'll leave you for this week.